+++
title = "For the love of science!"
date = 2014-06-29T17:41:00Z
updated = 2014-06-29T17:41:36Z
draft = true
blogimport = true 
[author]
	name = "Ivan du Toit"
	uri = "https://plus.google.com/109733145121386015159"
+++

I recently watched a <a href="http://www.ted.com/">TED</a> talk video&nbsp;called <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RxyQNEVOElU">Why we should trust scientists</a>&nbsp;by&nbsp;Naomi Oreskes, in which she tried to explain why common people should trust scientist. Before I continue I should just mention that I think that what she attempts is admirable and I don't want to attack her in any way. In fact I found it really refreshing that she was so frank about some of the flaws that the scientific method has. She mentions 3 problems which she explains very well but then never really addresses the problems or gives the listener an understanding to work around these flaws. She mearly launches into a naritive on why we should believe science because as she highlites most poeple can nver hope to verify most of the science outside of your respective fields.<br /><br />As part of the talk she mentions that it is best if the hypothesis that the scientists then set out to prove or disprove is in fact a law because laws are always true not matter the circumstances (this is a very misleading statement to lay people because laws always defined in a certain space or universe and can in fact not hold in some other situation but most people are not told about this assumptions and only know the law out of context which makes that statement false. examples Boyle's law, Gravity, Non-Newtonian physics, Quantum mechanics...) This statement is the crux of the problem in my opinion because if you start form something other than a law or universal constant you have a different context which is not the same as the sure context of math or some other abstract field. You don't understand the assumptions that you are making when viewing the results because you are part of the experiment and you can't remove yourself from it.<br /><br />Because of this I ask for the love of science please stop grouping things into little convenient boxes that we can steroitype and categorize and files away in our mind as understood and call it science. These are not the same things. You might follow some of the same procedures and share some of the same base. But they are categiorically and funcdamentally different things. I think that we are doing the real sciences a great disservice by calling any academic persute a science. Not because we are tarnising the respect or worthyness any of the respective fields. But because we are attributing a false sense of finality and binary thinking on the orhter fields and a lazyness on real sience which is unacceptable.<br /><br />To make my self clear I am not arguing that any of these fields are less usefull or that should nessarily change the way that these fields operate. I am saying that we should understand the nuiances of the different fields and disiplies and not just try to cloak everything in the same mantle of science just because we as modern people only listen to science. We have enought letter and sound space to call each if the different things by its own name so that we can understand and celibrate the differences and learn from each of the fields in a safe, calculated and open way.<br /><br />Examples of assumptions that was made in the video. When showing the climate model she claims that the model predicts the climate change so well because all of the other graphs correlate. And that is true if you look at the last 50 years. But if you look at the start of the century you see a sharp increase in temp just like in the last 50 years but not significant change in the other graphs. This should raise massive alarms in you mind because that shows that infact the model is incomplete because the is an unexplaind change in the model. WTF that is not science so don't call it t
