+++
title = "Interviewing a Programmer For Team Work"
date = 2012-10-03T19:48:00Z
updated = 2012-12-17T12:09:00Z
aliases = ["/2012/10/interviewing-programmer-for-team-work.html"]
tags = ["Job", "Interview", "Games", "Wild Idea", "Team Work"]
blogimport = true
author = "Ivan du Toit"
authorLink = "https://plus.google.com/109733145121386015159"
+++

One of the most underrated abilities of a &nbsp;great programmer in my&nbsp;opinion&nbsp;is team work. Some companies&nbsp;realize&nbsp;this and attempt to&nbsp;recruit&nbsp;team players. The problem is how do you&nbsp;determine&nbsp;if the applicant is a team player?<br /><br />The most common practice is to call&nbsp;references&nbsp;and ask them how well the candidate worked as part of a team. This approach has a few drawbacks, like the&nbsp;candidate&nbsp;hand picking these references thus casting&nbsp;doubt&nbsp;on the reliability of&nbsp;their&nbsp;testament. This reference might not not have been a core part of the team therefor not really in a good position to judge. So even&nbsp;unintentionally&nbsp;this candidate can choose a bad reference in terms of team work.<br /><br />I suggest that there might be a more natural and&nbsp;unbiased&nbsp;test that the interviewer can preform to verify the other sources that he might consult, does in fact give a good reflection of the candidates ability. Please note that I am not suggesting that this method should be used exclusively only that I might give a credit to other sources.<br /><h3>The Method:</h3>I think that a&nbsp;multi-player&nbsp;(team) game creates a natural environment for a young programmer (Older ones might not be&nbsp;comfortable&nbsp;with it) to&nbsp;demonstrate&nbsp;her&nbsp;ability&nbsp;to be part of a team. A game like DotA is in my mind perfect but other games will also work.<br /><br />When playing an intense game that the subject is&nbsp;familiar&nbsp;with his attention will be diverted for trying to impress the interviewers and on to what is happening in the game. This will allow his true team work to show. It is more natural for some people to&nbsp;always&nbsp;take the lead or play a more supporting role on the team which will be visible in the game very quickly according to how she communicates and behaves toward her team mates. I don't want to make this post to long and go over all the signs and&nbsp;behavior&nbsp;that can be gleaned by playing with the interviewee but I think that it will be a&nbsp;valuable&nbsp;source of information that is currently very difficult to obtain. These&nbsp;might&nbsp;include but are not limited to:<br /><ul><li>Communication skills</li><li>How does she handle orders</li><li>How does she handle having to take the lead</li><li>How does she react when&nbsp;criticized&nbsp;for failure (Both if it if she did fail and when she is falsely accused)</li><li>How does she handle pressure.</li></ul><div>All of these factors can't be know in a normal interview, but could be gathered&nbsp;by "relaxing" for 40-60 min before the interview continues.&nbsp;</div><div><br /></div><div>I hope that more of these kind of methods will be used by business to recruit real high performance workers and not just people that can sell themselves well. Because there is nothing worse that a&nbsp;colleague&nbsp;forces you to work more because he is&nbsp;incompetent.</div>
