+++
title = "On not getting used to the way things are."
date = 2013-12-21T16:34:00Z
updated = 2013-12-21T16:34:42Z
draft = true
blogimport = true 
[author]
	name = "Ivan du Toit"
	uri = "https://plus.google.com/109733145121386015159"
+++

Recently I watched 3 <a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8pTEmbeENF4">talks</a>&nbsp;<a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZfytHvgHybA">Bret</a> <a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PUv66718DII">Victor</a> gave regarding what he describes as being unsatisfied. What he means by this is that it is very easy to become used to the way things are done, without knowing why they are done that way. If this way is painful or inefficient we should not be content to just continue, we should be unsatisfied and search for and/or build better tools and methods. This point was also very well made in another <a href="http://exple.tive.org/blarg/2013/10/22/citation-needed/">post</a>&nbsp;by Mike Hoye about why we use 0 indexing in most modern programming languages. As he states, some of the reasons that are offered now are in fact valid reasons but could not have possibly have been the original reasons.<br /><br />The fact is that it requires energy to change anything. That is why we can only make a limited amount of well considered decisions each day. For this reason we &nbsp;should choose carefully what we want to spend our energy on. What we should not do though is conserve energy or choose to spend our energy doing things that we could do with less energy if we just spent the activation energy investment to create a better way of doing that task.<br /><br /><a name='more'></a><br /><br />For this reason I believe that it is very important that we should be conscious and on the lookout for opportunities to be disruptive of the normal way that some things are done, because only then can we motivate ourselves to put in the activation energy to fix or improve the existing method.<br /><br />I think I have found one place that I would like to improve the way things are done at the moment, which is the unlikely place ( for me ) of CVs, but more generally documents. The documents that we generate is so lifeless that it is insane. Just like Bret sees the fish from TV and paper as less fishlike than the simulated representation, the documents that we create now are also just facsimiles of the real world, with undo as Bret puts it.<br /><br />We should be making use of the fact that we can simulate models and interact with the documents. Presenting only one view on a document is so inefficient. Documents should incorporate models that can be played with and even extended to allow for better modeling of specifics, or to allow for variability and prediction. This will allow the readers to have a much better understanding of the subject that the document is describing than just a normal dry report.<br /><br />I should also just give and honourable mention to html documents which does really embrace and exhibit the flexible and dynamic simulation model. This along with some other reasons is why I enjoy working on on web related technologies rather than mobile which is so popular currently.<br /><br />The bottom line is that we should not become to used to outdated or inefficient ways of doing this just because it is comfortable or we don't immediately see a better way to do it. I sure know that I was inspired to renew the effort I put into looking for and improving practices that I think are outdated or inefficient.<br /><br /><b>Be&nbsp;unsatisfied.</b>
