+++
title = "Quotes (Don't publish needs edit, review and links)"
date = 2014-03-18T22:39:00Z
updated = 2014-03-18T22:39:45Z
draft = true
blogimport = true 
author = "Ivan du Toit"
authorLink = "https://plus.google.com/109733145121386015159"
+++

On of my favorite quotes are:<br /><blockquote class="tr_bq">Never attribute to malice that which is adequately explained by stupidity. - <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hanlon's_razor">Hanlons Razor</a></blockquote>&nbsp;On the face of it seems funny but also condesending by implying that most people are stupid and everything that they do can be dismissed as a result of that. While that might apply to some situations ( as can be seen whaching the news or reality tv) the much more insightful analisis is when you apply it to your actions.<br /><br />As a demonstration I will describe a conversation I had with a person whom we will call John ( it is based on real conversation);<br /><br />John: It would be awesome to see X happen in fact if X did happen we could do Y and that would be even more awesome because that would lead to Z which would be insanely awesome.<br />Me: Say awesome once more :) ( the smile is to convey the body language and intonation I used.)<br />Me:<strike> (Realising&nbsp;that what I said could be perceived as offensive) </strike>But that would not happen because that would be too awesome.<br />John: Yeah that would be go over the legal limit of awesome.<br /><br />Please note that I fully realise that I was a horrible conversation partner in this exchange (and unfortunately in a large percentage others as well) but at no point did I mean to give offence or criticise his thoughts but John could very well have perceived them as such. John did not do that in fact very much to his credit he tried to make me feel better by recognizing after my very inept and clumsy attempt at a recovery that I did not mean offence and rescued the situation. The conversation carried on and everyone continued to contribute in his own way to the conversation.<br /><br />To bring this conversation back to the quote we can look from John's perspective at the conversation. Either I meant the quip as an insult or at the very least a remark at his poor choice of words while he was excitedly thinking about the possibilities that his train of thought could provide. Or I could have meant it as just quip to keep the conversation interesting while basically just agreeing with what he said. <strike>As an aside, not just agreeing with someone in a conversation is a bad habit that I have that cause this sort of situation.</strike>&nbsp;In this situation John was graceful and took my meaning as I intended it just as the quote suggests. It was not malice but just stupidity on my part.<br /><br />I do believe that there are people that in fact defaults to intending the mean thing most of the time but you already know who they are and besides as I argued in a<span style="background-color: red;"> unpublished </span>previous post the net result of assuming they intended the positive thing regardless if they really did is better in any case.<br /><br />
