+++
title = "Understanding at levels of detail"
date = 2013-06-03T00:00:00Z
updated = 2013-06-03T00:00:10Z
tags = ["work", "detail", "abstraction", "Thinking"]
draft = true
blogimport = true 
[author]
	name = "Ivan du Toit"
	uri = "https://plus.google.com/109733145121386015159"
+++

I don't know why but most ( I can't think of any that don't) fields have laws, equations, behaviours or theories that explain what is happening at different levels of detail. This phenomenon is not just as we are understanding more and more of the subject but actually helps us to reason about the subjects at different levels of abstraction. Let me give an example: An engineer does not try to explain the movement of a machine or the behaviour of a material from a quantum mechanical level. The laws of motion or thermodynamics is sufficient. It is hoped that the engineer does understand why the higher level laws holds and when they do not, but the fact remains that the abstraction - which is a simplification of the lower level of ideas into an easier mental model - allow the engineer to be more efficient in his work and to already factor in some of the behaviour that will cancel or have a constant or no effect on his problem.<br /><br />You might say yes this may hold for science or engineering but the funny this is that we as humans use our brains just like this; we build these mental models and then use them to predict what should happen or what we should do etc. To further prove that we use it every where you can look at the social sciences where you have individual psychology and then group or crowd psychology that has links but it is completely insane (pardon the pun ) &nbsp;to try and predict crowd behaviour from the individual behaviour simply because there are just to much data and factors. But those factors can form patterns and structure that can be much more easily understood and described from a group psychology perspective.<br /><br />From this I would postulate that it should be a much more common practice to describe fields with these layers of abstraction. And not look down on the one or the other. We should understand that each level has a use in describing or looking at a certain set of problems and is perfectly suited for that purpose. To try to reason about these problems from a lower level of abstraction can be valuable but very inefficient and ineffective. For this reason I think we should be paying much more attention to which level of abstraction we should be thinking to solve our problem. It might even be necessary to solve the problem is a high level and only go to the lower levels where applicable, which I would class as a more elegant solution than a solution making only use of the lower levels.<br /><br />TL;DR We should be taught to understand fields at different levels of abstraction and be able to reason and solve problems at different levels of abstraction ( Preferable the highest possible level). But also understand when our abstractions will fail and be able to check our solution across the levels of abstraction. There should also not be a prejudice against any of the levels of abstraction as long as they provide a valuable tool. (Computer science is not better than Information science, it is just different levels of abstraction.)
