+++
title = "What I learned at University"
date = 2013-11-14T15:53:00Z
updated = 2014-03-17T17:08:23Z
draft = true
blogimport = true 
[author]
	name = "Ivan du Toit"
	uri = "https://plus.google.com/109733145121386015159"
+++

This post is my personal reflection on what I learned and the experiences I had over the entire course of the 3 year degree. I will not restrict it to only what I learned in class or because of the lecturers, but extend it to all the growth I experienced in this period.<br /><br />Please also understand that all of these observations are my experiences and might differ wildly from your own, but I think that even so there should be something that you can take away from it. In this post I highlight the concepts in general and explain what I mean by them. In the next post I will discuss some of the subjects that I had and what I learned in and thought of each of them.<br /><br /><h2>What you learn mostly depends on your attitude.</h2><div>This might seem like a strange though at first because at the end everyone passed the module, year or course did they not? Well yes, but have you noticed that there are just some things that you learned in a class that you just never forget but others are forgotten almost instantly. Now there are a miriad of things that contribute to this but all things being equal your attitude has a massive impact. This is the same effect that you experience when you take a subject given by your favorite teacher.&nbsp;</div><div><br /></div><h2>Expertise, Not a Good Teacher Make.</h2><div>Just because you know a lot about a certain subject does not make you qualified to teach that subject to novices, especially without training. In academia you are encouraged to focus on a very narrow field of study which allows you to push that field forward, but it means that essencial skills from other diceplines are not taught or even acknowledged. I will discuss this in a later section but to be a great teacher you need to know how to teach first and understand the subject se ond. In fact if you don't know the subject in depth, but continue to have a drive to learn yourself, yoy are setting a great example and you are able to relate to the misunderstandings of the students better.  </div><div><br /></div><h2>Education is not a Guarantee of Quality.</h2><div>There is quite a few people that I study with that I would not like to work with, not because of personal reasons but just because I believe that are in the wrong field or under qualified. Because of the nature of evaluation and human nature most students can complete any course given enough time and dedication. Please understand that I am not faulting those people I just realized that the education is a test where every positive should also be verified because false positives are a very real possibility. The false negative is the other side of the coin that is often disregarded. </div><div><br /></div><h2>Most students don't think.</h2><div>For all the talk about encouraging critical thinking in schools, I did not see many students that applied it Sure they could reason in tests about certain fields that they were taught on but making inferences and connect across subjects or fields is to much of an ask. This same problem then naturally carries over to the lecturers because all lecturers are, are students that has been at it a bit longer.</div><div><br /></div><h2>Communication is Important!</h2><div>Infact I would go so far as to say that the soft skills are as important as the technical or domain skills that we are taught. To properly expand on why I believe this is out of the scope of this post, But I will tell you what I mean by communication. Communication is not about where to put the address on a letter or how to address the recipient of an email. It is about transmitting ideas to one or more other parties, with clarity and understanding while optimizing for brevity. That is it, tell the other person what you think with as little words as possible while making sure that they understand what you mean.</div><div><br /></div><div>You can then continue to highlight some of the pitfalls and shortcuts for different mediums. And maybe go into some of the etiquette and design if you have time. But that is not the goal.</div><div><br /></div><h2>To Think at Different Levels of Abstractions.</h2><div><span style="color: red;">more</span></div><div><br /></div><h2>Thinking and working in a cross disciplinary way is essential.</h2><div><span style="color: red;">Need a better title.</span></div><div><span style="color: red;">more</span></div><div><br /></div><h2>I Am Not Ready to Create a Startup</h2><div><span style="color: red;">more</span></div><div><br /></div><div><br /></div><div><br /></div><div>Should I add some of the personal things?</div><div>like how I try to be more accomodating</div><div>And more understanding?</div><div>How I am trying to be more reservered and not talk to fast?</div><h2>Tests are horrible metrix.</h2><div><span style="color: red;">Should this be here?</span></div>
